---
layout: post
title:      "5 Studying Tips to Help if You are Struggling to Absorb the Material"
date:       2018-07-25 19:35:09 +0000
permalink:  5_studying_tips_to_help_if_you_are_struggling_to_absorb_the_material
---


I just wrapped up my final assessment for Flatiron’s Full Stack Online Web Developer Bootcamp and I wanted to share some of the most helpful tips and tricks I’ve picked up along the way. 

One of the really great things about the online bootcamp is that you can set your own pace. Have a full time job and have to squeeze it in on nights and weekends? Or maybe you are a stay-at-home mom or dad and you have to juggle learning about Rails with chasing a toddler around? Or maybe you’re able to work on the bootcamp full time ? The beauty of Flatiron’s program is that all of these scenarios are possible, opening up the world of coding to so many more people and giving valuable, life-changing access to people who might not be able to otherwise. 

Whatever your scenario, however you are handling/managing/juggling the workload…you are likely to struggle at times. We all do. Whether you’ve fallen into a rough patch because you just aren’t absorbing the material or you had to take some time off and are trying to get back into the swing of things here are five tips I’ve found helpful on this journey:

1. **Recall**: After learning something (a lesson, a video lecture, or a chapter of a coding book), close the material and immediately try to recall what you just learned. You can write it down if you like. You can tell someone out loud if you have someone available (who is willing to let you talk code at them…or even better, understand the material already!). You can even just think about it! The point is to immediately try to recall what you just learned, it doesn’t matter if the recall is mental, visual, or spoken aloud. 

2. **Repetition**: Sometimes you just have to try again. Perhaps you were distracted when you read through the lesson and let your mind wander. We’ve all been there. Repetition can help for so many things. Rereading lessons. Copying down notes while you read through again. All of this is helping to solidify the knowledge in your brain. You’ve likely seen a lot of coding lessons telling you to type along with them…do it! The physical act of following along, of actually typing the code (over and over again as you do with frequently used code) helps build muscle memory and memory memory! If you need to repeat a lesson, or re-read a chapter don’t feel bad about it, the repetition will help you in the long run! 

3. **Perfect Practice**: This goes along with the tip above a bit. Specifically the part about following along during coding lessons. Every project you build will help you not only remember the lessons you’ve learned but also understand them more deeply. Are you struggling to understand Rails? Build a Rails app! Don’t go crazy, but build something small. It can be simple and easy, it’s your project. Sometimes you can’t just learn by reading or seeing, you have to learn by doing. Maybe you need a little more practice than the labs in that section. That’s okay! You do what you’ve got to do to understand and absorb the material. A helpful bonus tip here that comes from one of our instructors, Alice: “Perfect practice makes perfect”.  You know how when you’re working out and you have to make sure your form and technique are correct?  If you don’t take the care to learn the perfect way to do it, you could get in the habit of using bad form which can lead to injuries. This same principle applies to coding, except instead of injuries you’d be at risk of bugs and bad practices! 

4. **The Feynman Technique**: This is an incredibly useful study technique that I wish I had discovered earlier in the bootcamp. This technique involves breaking a subject down so that you could explain it to someone who has no prior knowledge of it (or a toddler). It forces you to break things down into as simple of terms as possible and helps you refine your understanding of the topic so you can explain it clearly. Learn more about the Feynman Technique (and how to do it) [here](https://fs.blog/2012/04/learn-anything-faster-with-the-feynman-technique/). If you are struggling with a particular topic try using the Feynman Technique on it. Using this technique helps you really internalize and deeply understand a subject. This techniques is based on the premise that knowing the name of something and knowing something are two very different things. 

5. **Understanding the Trough and Peak Hours**: You ever have that experience when you sit down to learn or code and you feel like you have no energy and your brain isn’t working at maximum efficiency? You’re probably in the trough. People are more productive and have more energy at different points in the day.  We have both low periods of energy (the trough) and high periods, where we can get more done effectively (the peak). This varies based on a lot of factors, person to person, but for me personally it’s about 2pm. If you find this is often the case for you, I highly suggest you look into how you can identify your own peak hours. If you’re able to adjust your study schedule to get more work done during peak hours you might be surprised to find a vast improvement in how much you get done and how much you’re able to learn. Obviously, this isn’t always possible for everyone, but having the knowledge and self-awareness of your own peak hours is still a good idea. Learn more about peak hours, [here](https://blog.trello.com/find-productive-hours). 


That’s it! I hope you’ve found my study tips helpful and they are useful to you in your own coding journey. One final bonus tip: remember you aren’t alone! We’ve got a whole, amazing community here. If you’re struggling, reach out and see what other learners are doing and how they stay on track. 
